=head1 NAME

client.conf - LRRD-client configuration file

=head1 DESCRIPTION

LRRD-client is the client in a server/client pair that graph, htmlifies
and optionaly warns nagios about data it gathers. It's designed to let it
be very easy to graph new datasources.

"client.conf" is the configuration file for lrrd-client.

The format of the file is dictated by the use of Net::Server. A look at
"perldoc Net::Server" will give a list of options that the file supports
by using the module.

Additional options:

=over 5

=item B<< host_name <host> >>

If set, overrides the hostname lrrd-client uses in its 'hello'-negotiation
with the lrrd-server. A "telnet localhost 4949" will show the hostname
lrrd-client is currently using. If lrrd-client and lrrd-server do not
agree on the hostname, lrrd-server will skip all the plugins of the
machine in question.

=item B<< paranoia <yes|no|true|false|on|off|1|0> >>

If set, checks permissions of plugin files, and only tries to run files
owned by root. Default on.

=item B<< ignore_file <regex> >>

Files matching &lt;regex&gt; in the client.d/ and client-conf.d/
directories will be overlooked.

=head1 EXAMPLE

A pretty normal configuration file:

	log_level 4
	log_file /var/log/lrrd/lrrd-client.log
	port 4949
	pid_file /var/run/lrrd-client.pid
	background 1
	setseid 1

	host *
	user root
	group root
	setsid yes

	ignore_file \.bak$
	ignore_file \.rpm(save|new)$
	ignore_file ^README$

	allow ^127\.0\.0\.1$

	ignore_file \.dpkg-(old|new)$
	ignore_file \.rpm(save|new)$

See the documentation or LRRD homepage L<http://lrrd.sf.net/> for more info.

=head1 AUTHORS

Jimmy Olsen.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright © 2002 Audun Ytterdal and Jimmy Olsen / Linpro AS.

This is free software; see the source for copying conditions. There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE.

This program is released under the GNU General Public License

=cut
