=head1 NAME

munin.conf - Munin configuration file

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Munin is a group of programs to gather data from Munin's nodes, graph
them, create html-pages, and optionally warn Nagios about any off-limit
values.

"munin.conf" is the configuration file for Munin; munin-update,
munin-graph, munin-nagios and munin-html.

The format of the file is simple. A minimal configuration looks something like:

	dbdir           /var/lib/munin
	logdir          /var/log/munin
	htmldir         /var/www/munin
	tmpldir         /etc/munin/templates/

	[machine1.your.dom]
		address localhost

The default location of munin.conf is @@CONFDIR@@/munin.conf. If your placement
deviates from this norm, use the "--config E<lt>fileE<gt>"-option when running
the munin-* programs.

Munin-update  will expand all node-entries in this file, and save them to
@@DBDIR@@/datafile, which is used by all programs in the package together with
this file. 

Any options in this file will override options of the same name in "datafile".
E.g., if you want to change the title of the "load"-graph in the above minimum
configuration, you would modify the two bottom lines to:

	[machine1.your.dom]
		address localhost
		load.graph_title Edited title of the load-graph

This will override the "graph_title" field of the "load"-service, while keeping
all the others at their default.

NOTE: On all the examples below, all the 'top-level' parameters (dbdir, logdir,
htmldir, tmpldir) are not present. They are only skipped for brevity - they
are needed.

=head1 EXAMPLE 1

An example with three servers on two domains:

	[machine1.one.dom]
		address machine1.one.dom

	[machine2.one.dom]
		address 10.33.32.123

	[machine3.two.dom]
		address localhost

This will appear as two domains (one.dom and two.dom), having respectively two and one host.

=head1 EXAMPLE 2

Summarize the 'load'-graphs of the two  servers in one.dom, in a 'total load'-graph.

	[one.dom;Totals]
		update no
		load.graph_title Total load
		load.sum_load.title load
		load.sum_load.special_stack machine1=machine1.one.dom:load.load machine2=machine2.one.dom:load.load
	
See the documentation or Munin homepage L<http://munin.sf.net/> for more info.

=head1 AUTHORS

Jimmy Olsen.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright © 2002-2004 Audun Ytterdal and Jimmy Olsen / Linpro AS.

This is free software; see the source for copying conditions. There is
NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

This program is released under the GNU General Public License

=cut
