=head1 NAME

node.conf - Munin-node configuration file

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Munin-node is the node that Munin fetches data from, graphs, htmlifies
and optionaly warns nagios about data it gathers. It's designed to let it
be very easy to graph new datasources.

"munin-node.conf" is the configuration file for munin-node.

The format of the file is dictated by the use of Net::Server. A look at
"perldoc Net::Server" will give a list of options that the file supports
by using the module.

The following options are of special interest:

=over 5

=item B<< allow RE >>

IP based access list is implemented through this. The statement may be
repeated many times.  It's important to note that it's actually a
regular expression after the keyword so to allow localhost it must be
written like this:

      allow ^127\.0\.0\.1$

=item B<< host IP >>

The IP number of the interface munin-node should listen on.  By
default munin-node listens to all interfaces.  To make munin-node
listen only on the localhost interface - making it unavailable from
the network do this:

      host 127.0.0.1

=back

=head2 Additional options:

=over 5

=item B<< host_name <host> >>

If set, overrides the hostname munin-node uses in its
'hello'-negotiation with munin. A "telnet localhost 4949" will show the
hostname munin-node is currently using. If munin-node and the main munin
installation do not agree on the hostname, munin will skip all the
plugins of the machine in question.

=item B<< paranoia <yes|no|true|false|on|off|1|0> >>

If set, checks permissions of plugin files, and only tries to run files
owned by root. Default on.

=item B<< ignore_file <regex> >>

Files matching &lt;regex&gt; in the node.d/ and node-conf.d/
directories will be overlooked.

=head1 EXAMPLE

A pretty normal configuration file:

	log_level 4
	log_file /var/log/munin/munin-node.log
	port 4949
	pid_file /var/run/munin-node.pid
	background 1
	setseid 1

	host *
	user root
	group root
	setsid yes

	ignore_file \.bak$
	ignore_file \.rpm(save|new)$
	ignore_file ^README$

	allow ^127\.0\.0\.1$

	ignore_file \.dpkg-(old|new)$
	ignore_file \.rpm(save|new)$

See the documentation or Munin homepage L<http://munin.sf.net/> for more info.

=head1 AUTHORS

Jimmy Olsen.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2002-2006 Audun Ytterdal, Jimmy Olsen, Dagfin Ilmari
Mansåker, Nicolai Langfeldt

This is free software; see the source for copying conditions. There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE.

This program is released under the GNU General Public License

=cut
